Blog for AI Agent Observability (#6390)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/blog/2025/ai-agent-observability/index.md

---
title: AI Agent Observability - Evolving Standards and Best Practices
author: >-
  [Guangya Liu](https://github.com/gyliu513) (IBM), [Sujay
  Solomon](https://github.com/solsu01) (Google)
linkTitle: AI Agent Observability
issue: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/issues/6389
sig: SIG GenAI Observability
date: 2025-02-20
cSpell:ignore: genai Guangya Sujay vertexai
---

## 2025: The Year of AI Agents

As we move towards 2025, AI Agents are becoming the next big leap in artificial
intelligence. From autonomous workflows to intelligent decision-making, AI
Agents will power numerous applications across industries. However, with this
evolution comes the critical need for AI Agent Observability - especially when
scaling these agents to meet enterprise needs. Without proper monitoring,
tracing, and logging mechanisms, diagnosing issues, improving efficiency, and
ensuring reliability in AI Agent-driven applications will be challenging.

### What is an AI Agent

![Sample RAG based application w/ReAct reasoning/planning](ai-agent.png)

An AI agent is an application that uses a combination of a generative model’s

> capabilities, tools to connect to the external world, and high-level reasoning

Author: Done, thanks @michaelsafyan

to achieve a desired end goal or state.

### Observability and Beyond

Typically, telemetry from applications is used to monitor and troubleshoot
them - in AI agents’ case, given its non-deterministic nature, telemetry is also
used as a feedback loop to continuously learn from and improve the quality of
the agent by using it as input for evaluation tools.

Given both observability and evaluation tools for GenAI are from various
vendors, it is important to establish standards around the shape of the
telemetry generated by agent apps to avoid lock-in caused by vendor or framework
specific formats.

## The Current State of AI Agent Observability

### Understanding AI Agent applications vs. AI Agent Frameworks

It is crucial to distinguish between **AI Agent Application** and **AI Agent
Frameworks**:

- **AI Agent applications** refer to individual AI-driven entities that perform
  specific tasks autonomously.
- **AI Agent Frameworks** provide the necessary infrastructure to develop,
  manage, and deploy AI Agents often in a more streamlined way than building an
  agent from scratch. Examples include IBM Bee Stack, IBM wxFlow, CrewAI,

>   AutoGen, LangGraph and more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  AutoGen, LangGraph, PydanticAI and more.
```

Author: Done, thanks @samuelcolvin

author: >-
  [Guangya Liu](https://github.com/gyliu513) (IBM), [Sujay
  Solomon](https://github.com/solsu01) (Google)
linkTitle: AI Agent Observability
issue: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/issues/6389
sig: SIG GenAI Observability
date: 2025-02-20
cSpell:ignore: genai Guangya PydanticAI Sujay vertexai
---

## 2025: The Year of AI Agents

As we move towards 2025, AI Agents are becoming the next big leap in artificial
intelligence. From autonomous workflows to intelligent decision-making, AI
Agents will power numerous applications across industries. However, with this
evolution comes the critical need for AI Agent Observability - especially when
scaling these agents to meet enterprise needs. Without proper monitoring,
tracing, and logging mechanisms, diagnosing issues, improving efficiency, and
ensuring reliability in AI Agent-driven applications will be challenging.

### What is an AI Agent

![Sample RAG based application w/ReAct reasoning/planning](ai-agent.png)

An AI agent is an application that uses a combination of a generative model’s
capabilities, tools to connect to the external world, and high-level reasoning

> to achieve a desired end goal or state.

Reviewer 2: At the risk of driving this down into a hell hole of definitions, I far prefer Anthropic's distinction here: https://www.anthropic.com/research/building-effective-agents

- Workflows are systems where LLMs and tools are orchestrated through predefined code paths.
- Agents, on the other hand, are systems where LLMs dynamically direct their own processes and tool usage, maintaining control over how they accomplish tasks.

What's described in this block is ambiguous as to if it's a workflow or agent.

Perhaps it's also good to clarify that there _is_ a difference architecturally, and that this may also affect your overall strategy for observing them, but that for the purposes of instrumentation there aren't many differences?

- [AWS: What are AI Agents?](https://aws.amazon.com/what-is/ai-agents/)

### Observability and Beyond

Typically, telemetry from applications is used to monitor and troubleshoot
them - in AI agents’ case, given its non-deterministic nature, telemetry is also
used as a feedback loop to continuously learn from and improve the quality of
the agent by using it as input for evaluation tools.

Given both observability and evaluation tools for GenAI are from various
vendors, it is important to establish standards around the shape of the
telemetry generated by agent apps to avoid lock-in caused by vendor or framework
specific formats.

## The Current State of AI Agent Observability

### Understanding AI Agent applications vs. AI Agent Frameworks

It is crucial to distinguish between **AI Agent Application** and **AI Agent
Frameworks**:

- **AI Agent applications** refer to individual AI-driven entities that perform
  specific tasks autonomously.
- **AI Agent Frameworks** provide the necessary infrastructure to develop,
  manage, and deploy AI Agents often in a more streamlined way than building an
  agent from scratch. Examples include IBM Bee Stack, IBM wxFlow, CrewAI,

>   AutoGen, LangGraph, PydanticAI and more.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  AutoGen, Semantic Kernel, LangGraph, PydanticAI and more.
```
Semantic Kernel is closely partnering with AutoGen to provide an enterprise-ready solution to customers: https://devblogs.microsoft.com/semantic-kernel/microsofts-agentic-ai-frameworks-autogen-and-semantic-kernel/

In order to make a system observable, it must be instrumented: That is, code
from the system’s components must
[emit traces, metrics, and logs](/docs/concepts/instrumentation/).

Different AI Agent frameworks have varying approaches to implementing
observability, mainly categorized into two options:

#### Option 1: Baked-in Instrumentation

The first option is to implement built-in instrumentation that emits telemetry
using OpenTelemetry semantic conventions. This means observability is a native
feature, allowing users to seamlessly track agent performance, task execution,
and resource utilization. Some AI Agent frameworks, such as CrewAI, follow this
pattern.

As a developer of an agent framework, here are some pros and cons of this
baked-in instrumentation:

- Pros
  - You can take on the maintenance overhead of keeping the instrumentation for
    telemetry up-to-date.
  - Simplifies adoption for users unfamiliar with OpenTelemetry configuration.
- Cons
  - Adds bloat to the framework for users who do not need observability
    features.
  - Risk of version lock-in if the framework’s OpenTelemetry dependencies lag
    behind upstream updates.

>   - Less flexibility for advanced users who prefer custom instrumentation.

Reviewer 2: Is this actually true? I've not heard of baking in instrumentation making it difficult for users who also wish to augment autoinstrumentation with custom instrumentation, nor those who wish to just turn off autoinstrumentation and do it all themselves.

- Some best practices to follow if you consider this approach:

>   - Consider X as the mechanism through which you allow users of your framework

Reviewer 3: What is "X"?

>     to toggle emitting telemetry from the baked-instrumentation on/off.

Reviewer 2: What is "X"?

  - Plan ahead of users wanting to use other external instrumentation packages
    and avoid collision.

>   - Consider listing your agent framework in the OpenTelemetry registry if you

Reviewer 3: nit: a link to the registry

Author: Done

    choose this path.

> - As a developer of an agent application, you may want to choose an agent
>   framework with baked-in instrumentation if you prefer…
>   - Minimal dependencies on external packages in your agent app code
>   - Out-of-the-box observability without manual setup.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

As a developer of an agent application, you may want to choose an agent
  framework with baked-in instrumentation if you prefer…
  - Minimal dependencies on external packages in your agent app code
  - Out-of-the-box observability without manual setup.
```

Author: Done

These libraries can be imported into agents and configured to emit telemetry per
OpenTelemetry semantic conventions.

As a developer of an agent framework, here are some pros and cons of this
baked-in instrumentation:

- Pros
  - Decouples observability from the core framework, reducing bloat.
  - Leverages OpenTelemetry’s community-driven maintenance for instrumentation
    updates.
  - Allows users to mix and match contrib libraries for their specific needs
    (e.g., cloud providers, LLM vendors).
- Cons
  - Users must manually install and configure contrib libraries, increasing
    setup complexity.
  - Risk of fragmentation if users rely on incompatible or outdated contrib
    packages.
  - Less control over telemetry quality and coverage compared to baked-in
    approaches.
- Best practices for this approach:
  - Ensure compatibility with popular OpenTelemetry contrib libraries (e.g., LLM
    vendors, vector DBs).
  - Provide clear documentation on recommended contrib packages and
    configuration examples.
  - Avoid reinventing the wheel; align with existing OpenTelemetry standards.

> - As a developer of an agent application, you may want to choose an agent
>   framework with baked-in instrumentation if you prefer…
>   - You need fine-grained control over telemetry sources and destinations.
>   - Your use case requires integrating observability with niche or custom tools.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

As a developer of an agent application, you may want to choose an agent
  framework with baked-in instrumentation if you prefer…
  - You need fine-grained control over telemetry sources and destinations.
  - Your use case requires integrating observability with niche or custom tools.
```

Author: Done

## The Future of AI Agent Observability

Looking ahead, AI Agent observability will continue to evolve with:

- **More robust semantic conventions** to cover edge cases and emerging AI Agent
  frameworks.
- **A unified AI Agent Framework Semantic Convention** to ensure
  interoperability across different frameworks while allowing flexibility for
  vendor-specific extensions.
- **Continuous improvements to the AI Agent Semantic Convention** to refine the
  initial standard and address new challenges as AI Agents evolve.
- **Improved tooling** for monitoring, debugging, and optimizing AI Agents.
- **Tighter integration with AI model observability** to provide end-to-end
  visibility into AI-powered applications.

## The Role of OpenTelemetry's GenAI Special Interest Group

The **GenAI Special Interest Group (SIG) in OpenTelemetry** is actively defining
a set of **GenAI Semantic Conventions**, which encompasses several key areas:

- LLM or Model Semantic Conventions
- VectorDB Semantic Conventions
- AI Agent Semantic Conventions (a critical component within the broader GenAI
  Semantic Convention)

In addition to conventions, the SIG has also expanded its scope to provide

> instrumentation coverage for agents and models in Python and other languages.As

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
instrumentation coverage for agents and models in Python and other languages. As
```

Author: Done

---
title: AI Agent Observability - Evolving Standards and Best Practices
author: >-
  [Guangya Liu](https://github.com/gyliu513) (IBM), [Sujay
  Solomon](https://github.com/solsu01) (Google)
linkTitle: AI Agent Observability
issue: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/issues/6389
sig: SIG GenAI Observability
date: 2025-02-20
cSpell:ignore: genai Guangya PydanticAI Sujay vertexai
---

## 2025: The Year of AI Agents

> As we move towards 2025, AI Agents are becoming the next big leap in artificial

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In 2025, AI Agents are becoming the next big leap in artificial
```

(because it's already 2025)

intelligence. From autonomous workflows to intelligent decision-making, AI
Agents will power numerous applications across industries. However, with this
evolution comes the critical need for AI Agent Observability - especially when
scaling these agents to meet enterprise needs. Without proper monitoring,
tracing, and logging mechanisms, diagnosing issues, improving efficiency, and
ensuring reliability in AI Agent-driven applications will be challenging.

### What is an AI Agent

![Sample RAG based application w/ReAct reasoning/planning](ai-agent.png)

> An AI agent is an application that uses a combination of a LLM capabilities,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
An AI agent is an application that uses a combination of LLM capabilities,
```

tools to connect to the external world, and high-level reasoning to achieve a
desired end goal or state; On the other hand, agent can also be treated as
systems where LLMs dynamically direct their own processes and tool usage,

> maintaining control over how they accomplish tasks.

Reviewer 4: I don't understand the difference between these two sentences ("On the other hand").

You can also refer to following to get more detail for AI agents:

- [Google: What is an AI agent?](https://cloud.google.com/discover/what-are-ai-agents)
- [IBM: What are AI agents?](https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/ai-agents)
- [MicroSoft: AI agents — what they are, and how they’ll change the way we work](https://news.microsoft.com/source/features/ai/ai-agents-what-they-are-and-how-theyll-change-the-way-we-work/)
- [AWS: What are AI Agents?](https://aws.amazon.com/what-is/ai-agents/)

> - [AWS: Building effective agents](https://www.anthropic.com/research/building-effective-agents)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [Anthropic: Building effective agents](https://www.anthropic.com/research/building-effective-agents)
```

them - in AI agents’ case, given its non-deterministic nature, telemetry is also
used as a feedback loop to continuously learn from and improve the quality of
the agent by using it as input for evaluation tools.

Given both observability and evaluation tools for GenAI are from various
vendors, it is important to establish standards around the shape of the
telemetry generated by agent apps to avoid lock-in caused by vendor or framework
specific formats.

## The Current State of AI Agent Observability

### Understanding AI Agent applications vs. AI Agent Frameworks

It is crucial to distinguish between **AI Agent Application** and **AI Agent
Frameworks**:

- **AI Agent applications** refer to individual AI-driven entities that perform
  specific tasks autonomously.
- **AI Agent Frameworks** provide the necessary infrastructure to develop,
  manage, and deploy AI Agents often in a more streamlined way than building an
  agent from scratch. Examples include
  [IBM Bee AI](https://github.com/i-am-bee),
  [IBM wxFlow](https://github.com/IBM/wxflows/),
  [CrewAI](https://www.crewai.com/),
  [AutoGen](https://microsoft.github.io/autogen/dev//index.html),

>   [Semantic Kernel](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/semantic-kernel/microsofts-agentic-ai-frameworks-autogen-and-semantic-kernel/),

Reviewer 3: nit: I am sorry for the confusion, but this is probably a better link for semantic kernel: https://github.com/microsoft/semantic-kernel

  [LangGraph](https://www.langchain.com/langgraph),
  [PydanticAI](https://ai.pydantic.dev/) and more.

> ### Establishing a Standardized Semantic Convention

Reviewer 4: Could you add a paragraph or diagram explaining the difference between the "model", "agent" and "framework" layers? As it stands, there are a lot of words and links but not much intuition for a reader who is unfamiliar with the space.

E.g., could you take a sample conversation and call out which semconvs would describe which aspects of the telemetry?

  providing a foundational framework for defining observability standards.
  Moving forward, we will continue to refine and enhance this initial convention
  to make it more robust and comprehensive.
- **Agent Framework Semantic Convention** – Now, the focus has shifted towards
  defining a common semantic convention for all AI Agent frameworks. This effort
  is being discussed in
  [this OpenTelemetry issue](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/issues/1530)
  and aims to establish a standardized approach for frameworks such as IBM Bee
  Stack, IBM wxFlow, CrewAI, AutoGen, LangGraph, and others. Additionally,
  different AI Agent frameworks will be able to define their own Framework
  Vendor Specific Semantic Convention while adhering to the common standard.

By establishing these conventions, we ensure that AI Agent frameworks can report
standardized metrics, traces, and logs, making it easier to integrate
observability solutions and compare performance across different frameworks.

Note: Experimental conventions already exist in OpenTelemetry for models at
[GenAI Semantic Convention](/docs/specs/semconv/gen-ai/).

> ### Instrumentation Approaches for AI Agent Frameworks

Reviewer 4: What makes this section specific to AI Agent Frameworks (vs any other type of library, such as database clients or web frameworks)?

In order to make a system observable, it must be instrumented: That is, code
from the system’s components must
[emit traces, metrics, and logs](/docs/concepts/instrumentation/).

Different AI Agent frameworks have varying approaches to implementing
observability, mainly categorized into two options:

#### Option 1: Baked-in Instrumentation

The first option is to implement built-in instrumentation that emits telemetry
using OpenTelemetry semantic conventions. This means observability is a native
feature, allowing users to seamlessly track agent performance, task execution,
and resource utilization. Some AI Agent frameworks, such as CrewAI, follow this
pattern.

As a developer of an agent framework, here are some pros and cons of this
baked-in instrumentation:

- Pros
  - You can take on the maintenance overhead of keeping the instrumentation for
    telemetry up-to-date.

>   - Simplifies adoption for users unfamiliar with OpenTelemetry configuration.

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure that this is actually true given the zero-configuration mechanisms in OTel for setup.

Author: Customer still need to install otel instrumentation packages for different llm providers, sometimes, they may need to config otel collector to integrate with some 3rd party observability platforms.

With baked-in option, the agent may have build-in UI for observability which does not request any configuration, hope this helps.

- Cons
  - Adds bloat to the framework for users who do not need observability
    features.
  - Risk of version lock-in if the framework’s OpenTelemetry dependencies lag

>     behind upstream updates.

Reviewer 5: A related con/risk to call out:

 - You may not get feedback/review from OTel contributors familiar with current Semantic Conventions
 - Your instrumentation may lag with respect to best practices/conventions (not just the version of the OTel library dependencies).

Author: Done

  - Less flexibility for advanced users who prefer custom instrumentation.
- Some best practices to follow if you consider this approach:

>   - Provide a configuration setting that lets users easily enable or disable

Author: @michaelsafyan this is the baked-in option, if you take a look at crewai at https://docs.crewai.com/telemetry, you will see it has a parameter named as `OTEL_SDK_DISABLED` to config.

    telemetry collection from your framework's built-in instrumentation.
  - Plan ahead of users wanting to use other external instrumentation packages
    and avoid collision.
  - Consider listing your agent framework in the
    [OpenTelemetry registry](/ecosystem/registry/) if you choose this path.
- As a developer of an agent application, you may want to choose an agent
  framework with baked-in instrumentation if you prefer…

>   - Minimal dependencies on external packages in your agent app code

Reviewer 5: Is the number of dependencies in the long run truly that different?

Author: Yes, I think so. Like for otel, we need to install instrumentation code, otel collector, but with baked-in, do not need to install those dependencies manually.

>   - Out-of-the-box observability without manual setup.

Author: Here the manual set up will be mainly for the agent framework itself, like CrewAI or others. After the agent framework installed, there is no need to setup observability manually as it should be build-in with crewai or agent framework itself. Hope this helps.

> #### Option 2: Instrumentation via OpenTelemetry contrib

Author: Done

The second option is to publish language-specific libraries to the OpenTelemetry
contrib libraries (ex:
[opentelemetry-instrumentation-vertexai](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python-contrib/tree/main/instrumentation-genai/opentelemetry-instrumentation-vertexai)).
These libraries can be imported into agents and configured to emit telemetry per
OpenTelemetry semantic conventions.

As a developer of an agent framework, here are some pros and cons of this
baked-in instrumentation:

> - Pros

Author: Done

  - Decouples observability from the core framework, reducing bloat.
  - Leverages OpenTelemetry’s community-driven maintenance for instrumentation
    updates.
  - Allows users to mix and match contrib libraries for their specific needs
    (e.g., cloud providers, LLM vendors).
- Cons

>   - Users must manually install and configure contrib libraries, increasing

Reviewer 5: This is untrue. With zero-code setup, the instrumentation libraries can be auto-discovered.

See:
 
  - https://opentelemetry.io/docs/zero-code/python/

It is actually easier to leverage this with this approach, because `opentelemetry-boostrap -a` will auto-install instrumentation libraries from this repo, but it won't auto-install other instrumentation packages.

Author: removed

    setup complexity.
  - Risk of fragmentation if users rely on incompatible or outdated contrib

>     packages.

Author: yes, but sometimes the install can be succeed, and there maybe some runtime inconsistencies, incompatibilities, and maintenance issues that can arise when different users or frameworks depend on different versions of contributed (contrib) packages

>   - Less control over telemetry quality and coverage compared to baked-in

Reviewer 5: True, though:

 1. The quality is likely to be higher given the higher bar held in that repo for telemetry quality.
 2. There is still the ability to contribute to it in order to improve it.

I think the "less control" is more relevant in relation to velocity rather than in relation to quality.

Author: good point, updated to below

```
Development velocity slows down when there are too many PRs in the OpenTelemetry review queue.
```

---
title: AI Agent Observability - Evolving Standards and Best Practices
author: >-
  [Guangya Liu](https://github.com/gyliu513) (IBM), [Sujay
  Solomon](https://github.com/solsu01) (Google)
linkTitle: AI Agent Observability
issue: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/issues/6389
sig: SIG GenAI Observability
date: 2025-02-20
cSpell:ignore: genai Guangya PydanticAI Sujay
---

> ## 2025: The Year of AI Agents

Author: Done

AI Agents are becoming the next big leap in artificial intelligence in 2025.

> From autonomous workflows to intelligent decision-making, AI Agents will power

Author: Done

numerous applications across industries. However, with this evolution comes the

> critical need for AI Agent Observability - especially when scaling these agents

Author: Done

to meet enterprise needs. Without proper monitoring, tracing, and logging
mechanisms, diagnosing issues, improving efficiency, and ensuring reliability in

> AI Agent-driven applications will be challenging.

Author: Done

> ### What is an AI Agent

Author: Done

![Sample RAG based application w/ReAct reasoning/planning](ai-agent.png)

**NOTE:** The above picture is from
[Google AI Agent Whitepaper](https://www.kaggle.com/whitepaper-agents).

An AI agent is an application that uses a combination of LLM capabilities, tools
to connect to the external world, and high-level reasoning to achieve a desired

> end goal or state; Alternatively, agent can also be treated as systems where

Author: Done

LLMs dynamically direct their own processes and tool usage, maintaining control
over how they accomplish tasks.

> You can also refer to following to get more detail for AI agents:

Author: Done

- [Google: What is an AI agent?](https://cloud.google.com/discover/what-are-ai-agents)
- [IBM: What are AI agents?](https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/ai-agents)
- [MicroSoft: AI agents — what they are, and how they’ll change the way we work](https://news.microsoft.com/source/features/ai/ai-agents-what-they-are-and-how-theyll-change-the-way-we-work/)
- [AWS: What are AI Agents?](https://aws.amazon.com/what-is/ai-agents/)
- [Anthropic: Building effective agents](https://www.anthropic.com/research/building-effective-agents)

> ### Observability and Beyond

Author: Done

Typically, telemetry from applications is used to monitor and troubleshoot

> them - in AI agents’ case, given its non-deterministic nature, telemetry is also

Author: Done

used as a feedback loop to continuously learn from and improve the quality of
the agent by using it as input for evaluation tools.

Given both observability and evaluation tools for GenAI are from various

> vendors, it is important to establish standards around the shape of the

Author: Done

telemetry generated by agent apps to avoid lock-in caused by vendor or framework
specific formats.

> ## The Current State of AI Agent Observability

Author: Done

> 

Author: Done

> ### Understanding AI Agent application vs. AI Agent Framework

Author: Done

It is crucial to distinguish between **AI Agent Application** and **AI Agent

> Frameworks**:

Author: Done

![AI Agent Application vs AI Agent Framework](agent-agent-framework.png)

> - **AI Agent application** refer to individual AI-driven entities that perform

Author: Done

  specific tasks autonomously.
- **AI Agent Framework** provide the necessary infrastructure to develop,
  manage, and deploy AI Agents often in a more streamlined way than building an

>   agent from scratch. Examples include

Author: Done

  [IBM Bee AI](https://github.com/i-am-bee),
  [IBM wxFlow](https://github.com/IBM/wxflows/),
  [CrewAI](https://www.crewai.com/),
  [AutoGen](https://microsoft.github.io/autogen/dev//index.html),
  [Semantic Kernel](https://github.com/microsoft/semantic-kernel),
  [LangGraph](https://www.langchain.com/langgraph),
  [PydanticAI](https://ai.pydantic.dev/) and more.

> ### Establishing a Standardized Semantic Convention

Author: Done

Today, the
[GenAI observability project](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/blob/main/projects/gen-ai.md)
within OpenTelemetry is actively working on defining semantic conventions to

> standardize AI Agent observability. This effort is primarily driven by:

Author: Done

---
title: AI Agent Observability - Evolving Standards and Best Practices
author: >-
  [Guangya Liu](https://github.com/gyliu513) (IBM), [Sujay
  Solomon](https://github.com/solsu01) (Google)
linkTitle: AI Agent Observability
issue: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/issues/6389
sig: SIG GenAI Observability

> date: 2025-02-20

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
date: 2025-03-03
```

cSpell:ignore: genai Guangya PydanticAI Sujay
---

> ## 2025: The year of AI agents

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
## 2025: Year of AI agents
```

Author: Done

AI Agents are becoming the next big leap in artificial intelligence in 2025.
From autonomous workflows to intelligent decision making, AI Agents will power
numerous applications across industries. However, with this evolution comes the
critical need for AI agent observability, especially when scaling these agents
to meet enterprise needs. Without proper monitoring, tracing, and logging
mechanisms, diagnosing issues, improving efficiency, and ensuring reliability in
AI agent-driven applications will be challenging.

### What is an AI agent

![Sample RAG based application w/ReAct reasoning/planning](ai-agent.png)

**NOTE:** The above picture is from
[Google AI Agent Whitepaper](https://www.kaggle.com/whitepaper-agents).

An AI agent is an application that uses a combination of LLM capabilities, tools
to connect to the external world, and high-level reasoning to achieve a desired
end goal or state; Alternatively, agents can also be treated as systems where
LLMs dynamically direct their own processes and tool usage, maintaining control
over how they accomplish tasks.

> For more information about AI agents, check out the following resources:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
For more information about AI agents, see:
```

- [Google: What is an AI agent?](https://cloud.google.com/discover/what-are-ai-agents)
- [IBM: What are AI agents?](https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/ai-agents)
- [MicroSoft: AI agents — what they are, and how they’ll change the way we work](https://news.microsoft.com/source/features/ai/ai-agents-what-they-are-and-how-theyll-change-the-way-we-work/)
- [AWS: What are AI Agents?](https://aws.amazon.com/what-is/ai-agents/)
- [Anthropic: Building effective agents](https://www.anthropic.com/research/building-effective-agents)

### Observability and beyond

Typically, telemetry from applications is used to monitor and troubleshoot them.
In the case of an AI agent, given its non-deterministic nature, telemetry is
also used as a feedback loop to continuously learn from and improve the quality
of the agent by using it as input for evaluation tools.

Given that observability and evaluation tools for GenAI come from various
vendors, it is important to establish standards around the shape of the
telemetry generated by agent apps to avoid lock-in caused by vendor or framework
specific formats.

> ## The current state of AI agent observability

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
## Current state of AI agent observability
```

Author: Done

As AI agent ecosystems continue to mature, the need for standardized and robust
observability has become more apparent. While some frameworks offer built-in
instrumentation, others rely on integration with observability tools. This
fragmented landscape underscores the importance of the
[GenAI observability project](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/blob/main/projects/gen-ai.md)
and OpenTelemetry’s emerging semantic conventions, which aim to unify how
telemetry data is collected and reported.

### Understanding AI agent application vs. AI agent framework

It is crucial to distinguish between **AI agent application** and **AI agent
frameworks**:

![AI agent application vs AI agent framework](agent-agent-framework.png)

- **AI agent application** refer to individual AI-driven entities that perform
  specific tasks autonomously.
- **AI agent framework** provide the necessary infrastructure to develop,
  manage, and deploy AI agents often in a more streamlined way than building an
  agent from scratch. Examples include the following:
  [IBM Bee AI](https://github.com/i-am-bee),
  [IBM wxFlow](https://github.com/IBM/wxflows/),
  [CrewAI](https://www.crewai.com/),

>   [AutoGen](https://microsoft.github.io/autogen/dev//index.html),

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  [AutoGen](https://microsoft.github.io/autogen/dev/),
```

> ![AI agent application vs AI agent framework](agent-agent-framework.png)
> 
> - **AI agent application** refer to individual AI-driven entities that perform
>   specific tasks autonomously.
> - **AI agent framework** provide the necessary infrastructure to develop,
>   manage, and deploy AI agents often in a more streamlined way than building an
>   agent from scratch. Examples include the following:
>   [IBM Bee AI](https://github.com/i-am-bee),
>   [IBM wxFlow](https://github.com/IBM/wxflows/),
>   [CrewAI](https://www.crewai.com/),
>   [AutoGen](https://microsoft.github.io/autogen/dev//index.html),
>   [Semantic Kernel](https://github.com/microsoft/semantic-kernel),
>   [LangGraph](https://www.langchain.com/langgraph),
>   [PydanticAI](https://ai.pydantic.dev/) and more.

Reviewer 6: Let's move the figure so that it's not between the colon and the list items:

```suggestion
- **AI agent application** refer to individual AI-driven entities that perform
  specific tasks autonomously.
- **AI agent framework** provide the necessary infrastructure to develop,
  manage, and deploy AI agents often in a more streamlined way than building an
  agent from scratch. Examples include the following:
  [IBM Bee AI](https://github.com/i-am-bee),
  [IBM wxFlow](https://github.com/IBM/wxflows/),
  [CrewAI](https://www.crewai.com/),
  [AutoGen](https://microsoft.github.io/autogen/dev/),
  [Semantic Kernel](https://github.com/microsoft/semantic-kernel),
  [LangGraph](https://www.langchain.com/langgraph),
  [PydanticAI](https://ai.pydantic.dev/) and more.

![AI agent application vs AI agent framework](agent-agent-framework.png)
```

observability, mainly categorized into two options:

#### Option 1: Baked-in instrumentation

The first option is to implement built-in instrumentation that emits telemetry
using OpenTelemetry semantic conventions. This means observability is a native
feature, allowing users to seamlessly track agent performance, task execution,
and resource utilization. Some AI agent frameworks, such as CrewAI, follow this
pattern.

As a developer of an agent framework, here are some pros and cons of this
baked-in instrumentation:

- Pros
  - You can take on the maintenance overhead of keeping the instrumentation for
    telemetry up-to-date.
  - Simplifies adoption for users unfamiliar with OpenTelemetry configuration.
  - Keep new features secret while providing instrumentation for them on the day
    of release.
- Cons
  - Adds bloat to the framework for users who do not need observability
    features.
  - Risk of version lock-in if the framework’s OpenTelemetry dependencies lag
    behind upstream updates.
  - Less flexibility for advanced users who prefer custom instrumentation.
  - You may not get feedback/review from OTel contributors familiar with current

>     Semantic Conventions

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    semantic conventions
```

Author: Done

  - Your instrumentation may lag with respect to best practices/conventions (not
    just the version of the OTel library dependencies).
- Some best practices to follow if you consider this approach:
  - Provide a configuration setting that lets users easily enable or disable
    telemetry collection from your framework's built-in instrumentation.
  - Plan ahead of users wanting to use other external instrumentation packages
    and avoid collision.
  - Consider listing your agent framework in the
    [OpenTelemetry registry](/ecosystem/registry/) if you choose this path.
- As a developer of an agent application, you may want to choose an agent
  framework with baked-in instrumentation if you prefer…

>   - Minimal dependencies on external packages in your agent app code

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  - Minimal dependencies on external packages in your agent app code.
```

Author: Done

  - Out-of-the-box observability without manual setup.

#### Option 2: Instrumentation via OpenTelemetry

This option is to publish OpenTelemetry instrumentation libraries to some GitHub
repositories. These instrumentation libraries can be imported into agents and
configured to emit telemetry per OpenTelemetry semantic conventions.

For publishing instrumentation with OpenTelemetry, there are two options:

- Option 1: External instrumentation in your own repository/package, like
  [Traceloop OpenTelemetry Instrumentation](https://github.com/traceloop/openllmetry/tree/main/packages),
  [Langtrace OpenTelemetry Instrumentation](https://github.com/Scale3-Labs/langtrace-python-sdk/tree/main/src/langtrace_python_sdk/instrumentation)
  etc.
- Option 2: External instrumentation in OpenTelemetry owned repository, like
  [instrumentation-genai](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python-contrib/tree/main/instrumentation-genai)
  etc.

> Both option 1 and option 2 works well, but the long term goal is we should host

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Both options work well, but the long term goal is to host
```

Author: Done

the code in OpenTelemetry owned repositories, like Traceloop is trying to
[donate the instrumentation code](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/issues/2571)
to OpenTelemetry now.

As a developer of an agent framework, here are some pros and cons of
instrumentation with OpenTelemetry:

- Pros
  - Decouples observability from the core framework, reducing bloat.
  - Leverages OpenTelemetry’s community-driven maintenance for instrumentation
    updates.
  - Allows users to mix and match contrib libraries for their specific needs
    (e.g., cloud providers, LLM vendors).

>   - More likely to leverage best practices around Semantic Conventions and

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  - More likely to leverage best practices around semantic conventions and
```

Author: Done

    zero-code instrumentation
- Cons
  - Risk of fragmentation if users rely on incompatible or outdated contrib
    packages for both install time and runtime.
  - Development velocity slows down when there are too many PRs in the
    OpenTelemetry review queue.
- Best practices for this approach:
  - Ensure compatibility with popular OpenTelemetry contrib libraries (e.g., LLM
    vendors, vector DBs).
  - Provide clear documentation on recommended contrib packages and
    configuration examples.
  - Avoid reinventing the wheel; align with existing OpenTelemetry standards.
- As a developer of an agent application, you may want to choose an agent

>   framework with baked-in instrumentation if you prefer…

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  framework with baked-in instrumentation if…
```

Author: Done

  - You need fine-grained control over telemetry sources and destinations.
  - Your use case requires integrating observability with niche or custom tools.

> **NOTE:** Regardless of the approach taken, it is essential that all AI Agent

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
**NOTE:** Regardless of the approach taken, it is essential that all AI agent
```

Author: Done

frameworks adopt the AI agent framework semantic convention to ensure
interoperability and consistency in observability data.

## The future of AI agent observability

Looking ahead, AI agent observability will continue to evolve with:

- **More robust semantic conventions** to cover edge cases and emerging AI agent
  frameworks.
- **A unified AI agent framework semantic convention** to ensure
  interoperability across different frameworks while allowing flexibility for
  vendor-specific extensions.
- **Continuous improvements to the AI agent semantic convention** to refine the
  initial standard and address new challenges as AI agents evolve.
- **Improved tooling** for monitoring, debugging, and optimizing AI agents.
- **Tighter integration with AI model observability** to provide end-to-end
  visibility into AI powered applications.

## The role of OpenTelemetry's GenAI SIG

> The **GenAI Special Interest Group (SIG) in OpenTelemetry** is actively defining

Reviewer 6: What could we link to for the SIG?

Author: Done

> a set of **GenAI semantic conventions**, which encompasses several key areas:

Reviewer 6: How about linking to the existing semconv?

```suggestion
[GenAI semantic conventions](/docs/specs/semconv/gen-ai/) that cover key areas such as:
```

Author: Done

- LLM or model semantic conventions
- VectorDB semantic conventions
- AI agent semantic conventions (a critical component within the broader GenAI
  semantic convention)

In addition to conventions, the SIG has also expanded its scope to provide
instrumentation coverage for agents and models in Python and other languages. As
AI Agents become increasingly sophisticated, observability will play a
fundamental role in ensuring their reliability, efficiency, and trustworthiness.
Establishing a standardized approach to AI Agent observability requires
collaboration, and we invite contributions from the broader AI community.

We look forward to partnering with different AI agent framework communities to
establish best practices and refine these standards together. Your insights and
contributions will help shape the future of AI observability, fostering a more
transparent and effective AI ecosystem.

Don’t miss this opportunity to help shape the future of industry standards for

> GenAI Observability! Join us on the CNCF Slack channel
> **#otel-genai-instrumentation-wg** or by attending a

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
GenAI Observability! Join us on the [CNCF Slack](https://slack.cncf.io)
`#otel-genai-instrumentation-wg` channel, or by attending a
```

    (e.g., cloud providers, LLM vendors).
  - More likely to leverage best practices around semantic conventions and
    zero-code instrumentation
- Cons
  - Risk of fragmentation if users rely on incompatible or outdated contrib
    packages for both install time and runtime.
  - Development velocity slows down when there are too many PRs in the
    OpenTelemetry review queue.
- Best practices for this approach:
  - Ensure compatibility with popular OpenTelemetry contrib libraries (e.g., LLM
    vendors, vector DBs).
  - Provide clear documentation on recommended contrib packages and
    configuration examples.
  - Avoid reinventing the wheel; align with existing OpenTelemetry standards.
- As a developer of an agent application, you may want to choose an agent
  framework with baked-in instrumentation if…
  - You need fine-grained control over telemetry sources and destinations.
  - Your use case requires integrating observability with niche or custom tools.

**NOTE:** Regardless of the approach taken, it is essential that all AI agent
frameworks adopt the AI agent framework semantic convention to ensure
interoperability and consistency in observability data.

> ## The future of AI agent observability

Reviewer 6: @gyliu513 - this suggestion has not be committed.

Looking ahead, AI agent observability will continue to evolve with:

- **More robust semantic conventions** to cover edge cases and emerging AI agent
  frameworks.
- **A unified AI agent framework semantic convention** to ensure
  interoperability across different frameworks while allowing flexibility for
  vendor-specific extensions.
- **Continuous improvements to the AI agent semantic convention** to refine the
  initial standard and address new challenges as AI agents evolve.
- **Improved tooling** for monitoring, debugging, and optimizing AI agents.
- **Tighter integration with AI model observability** to provide end-to-end
  visibility into AI powered applications.

> ## The role of OpenTelemetry's GenAI SIG

Reviewer 6: @gyliu513 - this suggestion has not be committed.

---
title: AI Agent Observability - Evolving Standards and Best Practices
author: >-
  [Guangya Liu](https://github.com/gyliu513) (IBM), [Sujay
  Solomon](https://github.com/solsu01) (Google)
linkTitle: AI Agent Observability
issue: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/issues/6389
sig: SIG GenAI Observability
date: 2025-03-04
cSpell:ignore: genai Guangya PydanticAI Sujay
---

## 2025: Year of AI agents

AI Agents are becoming the next big leap in artificial intelligence in 2025.
From autonomous workflows to intelligent decision making, AI Agents will power
numerous applications across industries. However, with this evolution comes the
critical need for AI agent observability, especially when scaling these agents
to meet enterprise needs. Without proper monitoring, tracing, and logging
mechanisms, diagnosing issues, improving efficiency, and ensuring reliability in
AI agent-driven applications will be challenging.

### What is an AI agent

> ![Sample RAG based application w/ReAct reasoning/planning](ai-agent.png)
> 
> **NOTE:** The above picture is from
> [Google AI Agent Whitepaper](https://www.kaggle.com/whitepaper-agents).
> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
```

An AI agent is an application that uses a combination of LLM capabilities, tools
to connect to the external world, and high-level reasoning to achieve a desired
end goal or state; Alternatively, agents can also be treated as systems where
LLMs dynamically direct their own processes and tool usage, maintaining control
over how they accomplish tasks.

> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
![Sample RAG based application w/ReAct reasoning/planning](ai-agent.png)

<small>_Image credit_: [Google AI Agent Whitepaper](https://www.kaggle.com/whitepaper-agents).</small>

```
